Last Friday, the EPA
announced that some Volkswagen Audi cars
made between 2009 and this year
were using a so-called defeat device
to get around emissions
laws designed to keep the air clean.
But what does that mean exactly?
Well, modern cars have dozens of computers
inside them
and some of those computers
help coordinate
the functions of the engine
for optimum performance while making sure
that there isn't too much garbage
coming out of the exhaust pipe.
They've actually been working this way
for several decades now.
Basically, every part of a modern car's
engine has a sensor or a controller on it,
and these computers are reading in data
thousands of times per second,
making adjustments like the ratio of fuel
to air that's going into the cylinders.
These cheating Volkswagen
and Audi models are diesels.
And diesels have one more really important
computer controlled parameter,
which is the amount of unburned fuel
going into the exhaust.
Now, that sounds bad.
Doesn't sound like you would want unburned
fuel going into the exhaust,
but in the case of a diesel,
you have something called a NOx trap,
which is a device that absorbs and traps
nitrogen oxides that are pollutants
that would otherwise
go into the atmosphere.
And the effect of that NOx trap
is enhanced with unburned fuel.
So a defeat device is a special program
inside these computers that can make
it look like the car meets emission
standards, even when it doesn't.
Volkswagen had a problem on its hands.
Its diesel engines were known
for getting great fuel economy.
But the NOx trap only works
well when more fuel is being used.
So the car would detect
using this defeat device.
When it was getting an emissions test,
it would use more fuel,
make the NOx trap work.
Well, emissions would be fine.
But then you get on the road, the device
turns off, you're burning less fuel,
but you're putting as much as 40 times
more pollutants into the atmosphere.
But how the heck did the car know
that it was being tested
for emissions compliance?
The EPA says it was a sophisticated system
that checked things like steering wheel
position, speed, how long the engine was
on, and even the atmospheric pressure.
In other words,
there was no way this was accidental
because the software was designed
very carefully
to detect an official emissions test.
That's a pretty serious deception,
and that's
why Volkswagen is in such serious trouble.
In fact, their CEO, Martin Vinter
Cohen, just stepped down.
So what happens next?
Well,
if you own one of the half million diesel
Jetta beetles
golfs, PASSATS or Audi A3 is affected.
The good news is that
your car is still safe to drive.
You don't have to put it away
until Volkswagen issues a recall.
But at some point, they're probably going
to have to update the software
inside your car.
And when that happens,
you might get fewer miles per game.
Lawyers are already gearing up
for class action lawsuits,
so owners might get compensated
at some point in the future.
But that's not
going to happen anytime soon.